HIP: Server side apply support (#312)
helm/community: hips/hip-00XX.md

If a user deploys a chart with a new version of Helm with SSA enabled, then upgrades the chart with an older version of Helm. It is expected that the older Helm will be able to upgrade the chart with CSA. And the new manifest object will omit the indication of SSA usage from the releases manifest (and so futher upgrades/rollbacks will continue to use CSA by default).

In a future version of Helm 3 cli, it might be desirable to omit a warning if a user is not using SSA (in order to prompt the user to enabling SSA).

#### Custom resources

Helm will utilize SSA for custom resources, which previously it replaced (TODO: reference). As SSA allows custom resources to be correctly merged based on metadata within the CRD. Or the API server will use the default approach <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#custom-resources>.

#### Conflicts and forcing

> It is possible when Helm upgrades a chart, that there will be a field conflict with another field manager. In this case, Helm should report the error to the user.

Author: TODO: verify we can abort atomically across multiple objects (Ian Z points this out)

> It is possible when Helm upgrades a chart, that there will be a field conflict with another field manager. In this case, Helm should report the error to the user.

Author: TODO: think about hooks (Also Ian Z points this out)

Helm will also add a new flag `--force-conflicts`, and corresponding field to the `upgrade` and `rollback` commands. Which will tell the apply to ignore/override field conflicts (and so thus make Helm the field manager).

(Of note, Helm upgrade already includes the `--force` flag, which tells Helm to replace objects <TODO: confirm this, going from memory>. However, given this different semantics, it is thought a new flag is required)

### Implementation

<TODO: how do we execute SSA>
- field manager name

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L248
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L564-L657

#### Special

> - `--dry-run=client` doesn't work with SSA enabled

Author: @mattfarina points out that this will make it difficult for user's to preview changes

---
hip: 9999
title: "Utilize Server Side Apply for installs/upgrades"
authors: [ "George Jenkins <gvjenkins@gmail.com>" ]
created: "2023-07-07"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
helm-version: "4"
---

## Abstract

<!-- A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed. -->
This HIP proposes for Helm to support Kubernetes' [Server-Side Apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/) (SSA) for [object](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/?fundamental=true#term-object) management.

Helm 3 introduced the [three-way strategic merge and patch](https://helm.sh/docs/faq/changes_since_helm2/#improved-upgrade-strategy-3-way-strategic-merge-patches).
Allowing Helm to update objects which have been modified by other processes.
Kubernetes now offers a similar server-side process that has several advantages over the client-side apply (CSA) methods that Helm and `kubectl` (for example) have traditionally utilized.

> ## Motivation

Author: I should also include that client-side validation is now largely unsupported (need to read up on the details):

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/1625

(Of note, Helm upgrade already includes the `--force` flag, which tells Helm to replace objects during upgrade.
However, given this different semantics of `--force`, a new flag is required)

An additional special case is rollbacks on failed upgrade (`--atomic` flag). It is possible for Helm to attempt to rollback to a version which now has a conflict.
For which the rollback will fail.
Since rollbacks are "best effort" and can fail for other reasons as well, it seems best to treat this new rollback failure-case similarly (report to the user via logging and error).
If the user specified `--force-conflicts` to the upgrade, the corresponding rollback should similarly force conflicts (this is the behavior of `--force`).
If the rollback is to a release version which previously didn't have SSA enabled, the rollback install should also disable SSA.

#### Special

- `--dry-run=client` won't work with SSA enabled
- If the user attempts to use SSA with a cluster which does not support it (unlikely: SSA [went GA](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/08/06/server-side-apply-ga/) in Kubernetes v1.22), Helm should error

> - Client-side API object validation isn't applicable when SSA enabled (`helm install|upgrade --disable-openapi-validation`)

Reviewer: Could we still do this using the SSA with a dry-run?

Reviewer 2: It just means dry run won't be able to accurately show the results of server side apply without connecting to the server. This is already often true with the current merge strategy, but it's especially true of server side apply strategy. We could do this though with `--dry-run=server`. 

From the docs:
> --dry-run string[="client"]                  simulate an install. If --dry-run is set with no option being specified or as '--dry-run=client', it will not attempt cluster connections. Setting '--dry-run=server' allows attempting cluster connections.

- Hooks could be deployed with SSA. But as hook objects are not updated (create/delete only), they are not really affected
- Stored release manifests should not change (they store the object as Helm intends)

### Implementation

Helm will send object's manifests to the Kubernetes API server via SSA patches. Similar to `kubectl apply`.

> Utilizing the field manager name `"helm"`:

Reviewer: Should this be configurable? I'm thinking of a case where "Sam" and "Alex" might be managing the same namespace and want to be sure that they're not stepping on each other's toes.

Author: This HIP is only going as far as Helm supporting a single field manager. For the goal of switching from client-side to server-side apply.

I do think in the future, Helm supporting multiple field managers in the same chart with similar control on conflict resolution, should be done. But that ends up being a can of worm (stuff to design) I think we should defer for the moment.

Author: I should mention, see Rejected Ideas for some discussion

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L248
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L564-L602

## Backwards compatibility

<!-- Describe potential impact and severity on pre-existing code. -->

SSA should be generally compatible functionality-wide with CSA.
The expectation is that SSA should generally produce equivalent Kubernetes objects as CSA.

There four main behavioural differences for Helm switching to SSA:

1. The differences between object's manifests managed with SSA vs the existing three-way strategic merge process:
   - Arrays will be merged
   - Removal of unset fields

>    - Default values

Reviewer: Which side of the "vs" has which behavior?

Reviewer: The handling of removing previously set values in the 3-way merge by setting a null was recently fixed. Do we know how/if SSA will affect that behavior?

Author: > Which side of the "vs" has which behavior?

oops, right. these are benefits of SSA. Fixed language.

---

> The handling of removing previously set values in the 3-way merge by setting a null was recently fixed. Do we know how/if SSA will affect that behavior?

This was the input values merge, and dropping fields set to null from input values. This (I guess is kinda the same) but for object manifests applied to the Kubernetes API

2. Issues with a user enabling/disabling SSA over the lifetime of a release e.g. environment differences or older Helm clients which don't understand SSA
3. SSA will apply to custom resources
4. Field management ownership conflicts

For 1., chart-operators may opt-out out of SSA.
For 2., the user can control by ensuring SSA is consistently used within their environment.

> For 3., the it is generally considered a limitation of Helm not updating custom resources, for which SSA is expected to be an improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For 3., the it is generally considered a limitation of Helm not updating custom resource definitions, for which SSA is expected to be an improvement.
```

Author: language here is correct. CRDs are the objects which create new Kubernetes API resources. Custom resources are the objects created from those resource.

I'll amend to "custom resource objects" to be clear

For 4., the `--force-conflicts` flag exists.

> Additionally as noted, SSA isn't compatible with very old Kubernetes versions (Kubernetes v1.17 and prior)

Reviewer: You said 1.22, earlier. 🤷

Author: GA in 1.22

Iirc, SSA will work via beta release from 1.17. At this point, 1.17 vs 1.22 is probably water under the bridge now. Will improve this slightly.

Server-side apply and client-side apply should be equivalent security-wise.

## How to teach this

<!-- How to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the HIP to their work. -->

Documentation for how Helm does object upgrades, and the advantages of SSA.
Also documentation for the `--server-side=false|true|auto` and `--force-conflicts=false|true` flags, and the defaults for install/upgrades/rollbacks.
And the corresponding documentation for the field(s) SDK API objects.

## Reference implementation

<!-- Link to any existing implementation and details about its state, e.g.
proof-of-concept. -->

Kubectl:
- <https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L248>
- <https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L564-L657>

Prototype (hack) for Helm:
- <https://github.com/helm/helm/compare/main...gjenkins8:helm:server_side_apply_proto>

## Rejected ideas

<!-- Why certain ideas that were brought while discussing this HIP were not
ultimately pursued. -->

### Chart field manager support

This HIP defers including field manager support in charts.

> Helm could enabling apply objects with a distinct field manager names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helm could enable applying objects with a distinct field manager names.
```

Author: ugh, thanks. fixed

e.g. allowing a chart to supply multiple yaml manifest documents for the same object.

It is unclear how Helm users will interact with such a feature e.g. the chart developer might want/need to specify the objects field manage name in a chart.
And `helm template` might somehow need to allow describing the object's field manager name in its output.

Once more information is gathered on how chart developers might utilze explicit field manager support, a proposal introducing field manage support for charts could be written.

### Field ownership transfer

Helm won't support ownership transfer of fields.
Similar to the `kubectl` example: <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#transferring-ownership>.

> Dissimilar to `kubectl`, is Helm's distinguishes between chart developers and chart operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dissimilar to `kubectl`, is Helm distinguishes between chart developers and chart operators.
```

Author: ugh, terrible grammar here

The `--force-conflicts` flag documentation should explicity mention the downsides of conflict forcing ie. the chart update is overriding object values that another process is expecting to own/manage.

For more details, see SSA documentation [Overwrite value, become sole manager][ssa-conflicts]

(To note, `helm upgrade|rollback` commands already includes a `--force` flag, which tells Helm to replace objects during upgrade.
However, given this different semantics of `--force`, a new flag is required)

An additional special case includes rollbacks on failed upgrade (the `--atomic` flag). It is possible for Helm to attempt to rollback to a version which now has a conflict.
For which the rollback will fail.
Since rollbacks are "best effort" and can fail for other reasons as well, it seems best to treat this new rollback failure-case similarly (report to the user via logging and error).
If the user specified `--force-conflicts` to the upgrade, the corresponding rollback should similarly force conflicts (this is the behavior of `--force`).
If the rollback is to a release version which previously didn't have SSA enabled, the rollback install should also disable SSA.

#### Special

> - `--dry-run=client` won't work with SSA enabled.

Reviewer 2: Clarify Joe's question here https://github.com/helm/community/pull/312#discussion_r1964510343

```suggestion
- `--dry-run=client` won't accurately simulate an install with SSA enabled. This is already often true even with the current merge strategy, but especially true of Server Side Apply. To accurately simulate an install with SSA enabled, instead use `--dry-run=server`.
```

Utilizing the field manager name `"helm"`:

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L248
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/blob/197123726db24c61aa0f78d1f0ba6e91a2ec2f35/pkg/cmd/apply/apply.go#L564-L602

## Backwards compatibility

<!-- Describe potential impact and severity on pre-existing code. -->

SSA should be generally compatible functionality-wise with CSA.
The expectation is that SSA should generally produce equivalent Kubernetes objects as CSA.

There four main behavioural differences for Helm switching to SSA:

1. The differences between object's manifests managed with SSA vs the existing three-way strategic merge process. SSA will enable:
   - Arrays will be merged
   - Removal of unset fields
   - Default values
2. Issues with a user enabling/disabling SSA over the lifetime of a release e.g. environment differences or older Helm clients which don't understand SSA
3. SSA will apply to custom resources
4. Field management ownership conflicts

For 1., chart-operators may opt-out out of SSA.
For 2., the user can control by ensuring SSA is consistently used within their environment.

> For 3., the it is generally considered a limitation of Helm not updating custom resource objects, for which SSA is expected to be an improvement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For 3., it is generally considered a limitation of Helm not updating custom resource objects, for which SSA is expected to be an improvement.
```
